===============================
 SciPy India 2010 in Hyderabad
===============================

I have just returned to the USA after an intense ~10 days in India, where I had
the opportunity to participate at the `Scipy India 2010 conference`_ thanks to
a generous invitation by `Prabhu Ramachandran`_ and his `FOSSEE.in`_  project.
Fossee.in (Free and Open Source Software in Engineering and Education in India)
is a remarkable effort to systematically develop tools for the technical
education and research environments in India based around an open source
ecosystem, and Python plays a central role there (though other tools like LaTeX
and Scilab are also used).  Considering that India, per Prabhu's numbers,
graduates approximately 800.000 technical and engineering students per year,
the potential long-term impact of this effort is absolutely enormous, and
Prabhu has assembled a team full of both energy and talent.  I've been very
excited about this since I first heard the news of its funding, and I'm glad to
have had the chance of working with several members of the team for a few days.

.. _Scipy India 2010 conference: http://scipy.in
.. _Prabhu Ramachandran:
.. _fossee.in: 

The project brough to the conference a group of invited speakers from outside
India: Perry Greenfield, John Hunter, Stefan van der Walt, Satrajit Ghosh,
Jarrod Millman and myself.  Prabhu and his wife Kadambari (KD), also a member
of the fossee team, did a wonderful job in hosting us, and the hospitality of
the whole team was remarkable; I can't thank them enough for the time and
energy they put into making all of us feel comfortable and enjoy our visit
(which for most of us was our first foray into India).

The conference
==============

The conference itself followed a similar format (with minor order alterations)
to the US SciPy ones: two days of regular talks, then a mix of introductory
tutorials and development sprints.  A brief summary of the (longer) invited
talks and a sampling of contributed talks follows.

Perry presented a beautiful opening keynote that combined the history of
Python's growth in scientific computing through the eyes of the astronomy
world, where he has played a leading role for years, with examples of the
scientific problems in modern astronomy they have faced (and sometimes solved
using Python).  John gave an overview of matplotlib_ that included both
historical aspects and an overview of its current capabilities, highlighting
some points that many people might not be aware of, like the new animation
functionality.  Stefan's talk was about the social aspects of participaitng in
open source communities as part of an academic career, a topic which I think
was very fitting for the audience, since he showed how his contributions to
Numpy and other Python tools have opened many scientific and professional doors
for him.  Given how the goal of the Fossee project is to involve India's
scientists and engineers with this community, I think this was probably one of
the most useful talks of the event, and it was delivered with Stefan's unique
combination of flair and self-deprecating humor that make him such a great
speaker.  Satra and Jarrod both spoke about projects centered around
neuroscience; Satra offered the audience (not composed of neuroscientists) an
excellent introduction to the relevant scientific questions and an overview of
the problems of modern neuroimaging data analysis and how the Nipype_ package
offers solutions for some of them.  Jarrod spoke about the genesis of the
umbrella Nipy_ effort that Nipype is a part of, and which now encompasses a
number of related Python packages, each targeted at a different aspect of
modern neuroimaging analysis.

.. _nipy: http://nipy.org
.. _nipype: http://nipy.org/nipype
.. _matplotlib: http://matplotlib.sf.net



IPython
=======



.. _larry: http://github.com/kwgoodman/la
.. _pandas: http://code.google.com/p/pandas
.. _on github: http://github.com/fperez/datarray
.. _documentation: http://fperez.github.com/datarray-doc/
.. _py4science series: https://cirl.berkeley.edu/view/Py4Science
.. _an early proto-release to PyPI: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/datarray
